Post: nanoparquet 0 3 0 (#698)
tidyverse/tidyverse.org: content/blog/nanoparquet-0-3-0/index.Rmd

  of columns, and easy ways of removing columns or adding new columns to a
  data file.

* **Binary**. A Parquet file is not a text file. Each Parquet data type
  is stored in a well-defined binary storage format, leaving no ambiguity
  about how fields are persed.

* **Rich types**. Parquet supports a small set of _low level_ data types
  with well specified storage formats and encodings. On top of the low
  level types, it implemented several higher level logical types, like
  UTF-8 strings, time stamps, JSON strings, ENUM types (factors), etc.

* **Well supported**. At this point Parquet is well supported across
  modern languages like R, Python, Rust, Java, Go, etc. In particular,
  Apache Arrow handles Parquet files very well, and has bindings to many
  languages. DuckDB is a very portable tool that reads and writes Parquet
  files, or even opens a set of Parquet files as a database.

* **Performant**. Parquet columns may use various encodings and compression
  to ensure that the data files are kept as small as possible. When running
  an analytical query on the subset of the data, the Parquet format makes

>   it easy to skip the columns and/or rows that are irrelevant.

Reviewer: Mention something about parallelism too?

* **Missing values**. Support for missing values is built into the Parquet
  format.

## Why we created nanoparquet?

Although Parquet is well supported by modern languages, today the
complexity of the Parquet format often outweighs its benefits for smaller
data sets. Many tools that support Parquet are typically used for larger,
out of memory data sets, so there is a perception that Parquet is only for
big data. These tools typically take longer to compile or install, and
often seem too heavy for in-memory data analysis.

With nanoparquet, we wanted to have a smaller tool that has no dependencies
and is easy to install. Our goal is to facilitate the adoption of Parquet
for smaller data sets, especially for teams that share data between
multiple environments, e.g. R, Python, Java, etc.

## nanoparquet Features

These are some of the nanoparquet features that we are most excited about.

* **Lightweight**. nanoparquet has no package or system dependencies other

>   than a C++-11 compiler. It compiles in about 30 seconds, into an R

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  than a C++-11 compiler. It compiles in about 30 seconds into an R
```

  package that is less than a megabyte in size.

* **Reads many Parquet files**. `nanoparquet::read_parquet()` supports
  reading most Parquet files. In particular, in supports all Parquet
  encodings and at the time of writing it supports three compression
  codecs: Snappy, Gzip and Zstd. Make sure you read "Limitations" below.

* **Writes many R data types**. `nanoparquet::write_parquet()` supports
  writing most R data frames. In particular, missing values are handled

>   properly, factor columns are keps as factors, temporal types as well.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  properly, factor columns are keps as factors, and temporal types are encoded correctly.
```

Or similar

  Make sure you read "Limitations" below.

* **Type mappings**. nanoparquet has a well defined set of
  [type mapping rules](https://r-lib.github.io/nanoparquet/reference/nanoparquet-types.html).
  Use the [`parquet_column_types()`](https://r-lib.github.io/nanoparquet/dev/reference/parquet_column_types.html)
  function to see how `read_parquet()` and `write_parquet()` maps
  Parquet and R types for a file or a data frame.

> * **Metadata queries**. nanoparquet has a
>   [number of functions](https://r-lib.github.io/nanoparquet/dev/reference/index.html#extract-parquet-metadata)
>   to query the metadata and schema in Parquet files.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Metadata queries**. nanoparquet has a
  [number of functions](https://r-lib.github.io/nanoparquet/dev/reference/index.html#extract-parquet-metadata)
  that allow you to query the metadata and schema without reading in the full dataset.
```

## Examples

### Reading a Parquet file

The nanoparquet R package contains an example Parquet file.
We are going to use it to demonstrate how the package works.

If the pillar package is loaded, then nanoparquet data frames are
pretty-printed.

```{r}
library(nanoparquet)
library(pillar)
udf <- system.file("extdata/userdata1.parquet", package = "nanoparquet")
```

Before actually reading the file, let's look up some metadata about it,
and also how its columns will be mapped to R types:

```{r}
parquet_info(udf)
```

```{r}
parquet_column_types(udf)
```

For every Parquet column we see its low level Parquet data type in `type`,
e.g. `INT64` or `BYTE_ARRAY`. `r_type` the R type that `read_parquet()`
will create for that column. If `repetition_type` is `REQUIRED`, then that
column cannot contain missing values. `OPTIONAL` columns may have missing
values. `logical_type` is the higher level Parquet data type.

E.g. the first column is an UTC (because of the `TRUE`) timestamp, in
microseconds. It is stored as a 64 bit integer in the file, and it will be
converted to a `POSIXct` object by `read_parquet()`.

To actually read the file into a data frame, and look at the first

> couple of rows, call

Reviewer: ```suggestion
couple of rows, call `read_parquet()`:
```

also includes "internal" parquet columns. Every Parquet file is a tree
where columns may be part of an "internal" column. nanoparquet currently
only supports flat files, that consist of a single internal root column
and all other columns are leaf columns and are children of the root:

```{r}
parquet_schema("flights.parquet")
```

To see more information about a Parquet file, use `parquet_metadata()`:

```{r}
parquet_metadata("flights.parquet")
```

The output will include the schema, as above, but also data about the
row groups (`write_parquet()` always writes a single row group currently),
and column chunks. There is one column chunk per column in each row group.

The columns chunk information also tells you whether a column chunk is
dictionary encoded, its encoding, its size, etc.

```{r}
cc <- parquet_metadata("flights.parquet")$column_chunks
cc[, c("column", "encodings", "dictionary_page_offset")]
```

```{r}
cc[["encodings"]][1:3]
```

## Limitations

nanoparquet 0.3.0 has a number of limitations.

* **Only flat tables**. `read_parquet()` can only read flat tables, i.e.
  Parquet files where all leaf columns are children of a single root

>   column. Similarly, `write_parquet()` will not write list columns.

Reviewer: Can you reframe "all leaf columns are children of a single root column" into something more informal that an R user is more likely to understand?

  as raw vectors of a list column currently, e.g. `FLOAT16`, `INTERVAL`.
  See [the manual](https://r-lib.github.io/nanoparquet/reference/nanoparquet-types.html)
  for details.

* **No encryption**. Encrypted Parquet files are not supported.

* **Missing compression codecs**. `LZO`, `BROTLI` and `LZ4` compression is
  not yet supported.

* **No statistics**. nanoparquet does not read or write statistics, e.g.
  minimum and maximum values from and to Parquet files.

* **No checksums**. nanoparquet does not check or write checksums
  currently.

* **No Bloom filters**. nanoparquet does not currently support reading
  or writing Bloom filters from or to Parquet files.

* **May be slow for large files**. Being single-threaded and not fully
  optimized, nanoparquet is probably not suited well for large data sets.
  It should be fine for a couple of gigabytes. It may be fine if all the
  data fits into memory comfortably.

* **Single row group**. `write_parquet()` always creates a single row
  group, which is not optimal for large files.

* **Automatic encoding**. It is currently not possible to choose encodings
  in `write_parquet()` manually.

> 

Reviewer: I think it's worth a note here that we'll try to tackle (some) of these over time, while continuing to keep nanoparquet lightwight. And encourage folks to submit issues if there are features that we don't support that are important for them.
